.TH MOM 8 "2026-03-25" "mom 0.1.0" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
mom \- Meta Overlay Manager: install packages without root access
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mom
.RB [ \-y ]
.B install
.IR package " [" package "...]"
.br
.B mom
.RB [ \-y ]
.B update
.IR package " [" package "...]"
.br
.B mom
.B refresh
.br
.B mom
.B \-\-check
.br
.B mom
.B \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mom
(Meta Overlay Manager) allows non-root users to install and update packages
on systems where they lack root access. It delegates to
.BR apt-get (8)
on Debian/Ubuntu systems and
.BR dnf (8)
on RHEL/Rocky Linux systems.
.PP
.B mom
must be deployed as a setuid-root binary. Only members of the configured
group (default:
.BR mom )
may perform install and update operations. The
.B refresh
subcommand may be run by any user who can execute the binary.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "install " "package " "[package...]"
Install one or more packages. Package names are validated and checked
against the deny list before any package manager is invoked.
.TP
.BI "update " "package " "[package...]"
Refresh the package repository metadata, then update the named packages.
Each package must already be installed; mom will error out rather than
silently install an unlisted package.
.TP
.B refresh
Refresh package repository metadata only (\fBapt-get update\fR or
\fBdnf makecache\fR). No group membership check is performed; any user
who can execute the binary may run this subcommand.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes
Suppress interactive prompts. Passed directly to
.B apt-get
or
.BR dnf .
.TP
.B \-\-check
Validate the configuration file and deny list without performing any
package operations. Prints a summary of all checks performed.
Intended for sysadmin use.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B mom
reads
.I /etc/mom/mom.conf
at startup. If the file does not exist, safe defaults are used.
The file must be owned by root and must not be world-writable.
Format: one
.BI key " = " value
pair per line. Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.
.PP
Supported keys:
.TP
.B group
Name of the Unix group whose members may run
.BR mom .
Default:
.BR mom .
.TP
.B deny_list
Path to the package deny list file. May reside on a shared filesystem.
Default:
.IR /etc/mom/deny.list .
.TP
.B log_file
Path to the JSON audit log.
Default:
.IR /var/log/mom.log .
.TP
.B http_proxy
HTTP proxy URL passed to
.B apt-get
/
.BR dnf .
Not set by default.
.TP
.B https_proxy
HTTPS proxy URL passed to
.B apt-get
/
.BR dnf .
Not set by default.
.SH DENY LIST
The deny list file (default
.IR /etc/mom/deny.list )
contains one or more entries per line, separated by spaces. Entries are glob patterns matched against
package names. Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments. Empty lines are ignored.
.PP
Example:
.PP
.RS
.nf
# Block network scanners
nmap
wireshark

# Block all Python development headers
python3-*

# Block all -dev packages
*-dev
.fi
.RE
.PP
The deny list file must be owned by root or the configured
.B mom
group. It must not be world-writable. If the file does not exist,
all packages are permitted (subject to other access controls).
.SH INSTALLATION & SETUP
.SS "1. Create the mom group"
.nf
groupadd mom
.fi
.SS "2. Install the binary"
.nf
install -o root -g mom -m 4750 /path/to/mom /usr/bin/mom
.fi
.PP
Or, to allow all users to run
.BR refresh :
.nf
install -o root -g root -m 4755 /path/to/mom /usr/bin/mom
.fi
.SS "3. Create the configuration directory"
.nf
mkdir -p /etc/mom
chown root:root /etc/mom
chmod 755 /etc/mom
.fi
.SS "4. Create the deny list"
.nf
touch /etc/mom/deny.list
chown root:mom /etc/mom/deny.list
chmod 640 /etc/mom/deny.list
.fi
.SS "5. Create the log file"
.nf
touch /var/log/mom.log
chown root:root /var/log/mom.log
chmod 640 /var/log/mom.log
.fi
.SS "6. Add users to the mom group"
.nf
usermod -aG mom alice
usermod -aG mom bob
.fi
.SH SECURITY
.B mom
is a setuid-root binary. The following security measures are applied at runtime:
.IP \(bu 2
The caller's entire environment is discarded before invoking
.B apt-get
or
.BR dnf .
.IP \(bu 2
Package manager binaries are called via hardcoded absolute paths.
.IP \(bu 2
Arguments are passed as discrete
.BR execve (2)
argv entries — never via a shell.
.IP \(bu 2
All supplemental groups are dropped immediately at startup.
.IP \(bu 2
Package names are validated against a strict regular expression before use.
.IP \(bu 2
All operations (including denied attempts) are logged to
.I /var/log/mom.log
and syslog.
.PP
See
.I /usr/share/doc/mom/SECURITY.md
for the full threat model and security analysis.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/bin/mom
The setuid-root binary.
.TP
.I /etc/mom/mom.conf
Configuration file. Must be owned by root.
.TP
.I /etc/mom/deny.list
Package deny list. Must be owned by root or the mom group.
.TP
.I /var/log/mom.log
JSON audit log.
.TP
.I /etc/logrotate.d/mom
Log rotation configuration.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR apt-get (8),
.BR dnf (8),
.BR dpkg (1),
.BR rpm (8),
.BR sudoers (5),
.BR groupadd (8),
.BR usermod (8)
.SH AUTHORS
Dirk Petersen
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/dirkpetersen/mom/issues
